name: Michelangelo_and_the_Pope_s_Ceiling
isbn: 0142003697
title: [[http://amzn.com/0142003697][Michelangelo and the Pope's Ceiling]]
author: Ross King
publisher: Penguin Books
year: 2003
start: 2007-02-17
stop: 2007-03-08

What a treat.  This book felt like the best read I've had in a long
time.  This may seem unfair to some of the great books I've read
recently, but this one was at the same time instructive and of very
easy access.  It covered everything from the technical aspects of
painting frescos to the artistic concerns that went into the vault of
the Sistine Chapel, to the geo-political landscape of Italy at the
beginning of the 16<sup>th</sup> Century.

The books starts with Michelangelo's early career and how he landed
the commission to fresco the vault of the Sistine Chapel.  It was very
interesting to see the life of a tradesman in those days.  The author
goes over Michelangelo's character and his relationships with various
figures of the days.  As the book follows the progress on the vault, we
are made privy to the ever changing political landscape and the ongoing
competition with Raphael, as each one pushes the boundaries of art.

I have read quite a bit about the Papacy during the Middle-Ages and
this was a very nice refresher of the events in Northern Italy at the
time.  The book is as much about Pope Julius II as it is about
Michelangelo.  But the real focus of the book is the fresco and its
numerous panels and figures.  The author walks us over all the
difficulties, tribulations, and inventions that continually happened
throughout the project.

The book has many illustrations and nice color plates of the entire
vault.  But for some reason, it is missing the two pendentives from the
altar wall that were considered by Michelangelo's contemporaries as his
best work.  There are also other works, notably by Raphael, that are
not depicted and I had to go to the Internet in order to see them.  But
it was still a very enjoyable read that gave me a new prespective on
this cornerstone of Western culture.
