name: Agile_Coaching
isbn: 1934356433
title: [[http://amzn.com/1934356433][Agile Coaching]]
author: Rachel Davies
author: Liz Sedley
publisher: Pragmatic Bookshelf
year: 2009
acquired: 2009-10-04
start: 2011-10-27
stop: 2011-11-21

I was an agile coach at Google for 18 months, starting in 2008.  I figured I
should check out this book and compare notes.

The book is directed specifically at agile coaches: people whose role it is to
turn development teams to agile methodologies.  The authors are trying to mentor
the mostly junior coaches in how to deal with their team.  There are three
layers of experience: teams have limited knowledge of agile, coaches know agile
principles and are passionate about them, but lack skills to transfer their
knowledge and enthusiasm to their team, and the authors who have it all.

The authors cover many situations that can occur with teams new to agile and
some of the ways to get them past obstacles.  In doing so, they often drop into
_you_ vs. _them_ language.  This emphasises the adversarial aspect of the
relationship between team and coach and makes the job of the coach that much
harder.  Teams can emit enough negative energy on their own without muddying the
channel further.  Coaches really need to cultivate their sense of being part of
their team, not apart from it.  Even if the assignment is temporary, for its
duration their fate is tied to that of the team.

There is a lot of material for junior coaches dealing with novice teams.  One
thing that I found missing was more advanced material.  Agile books in general
are good at bootstrapping a self-adjusting team, saying that over time they will
find individually optimal processes.  But what are the stumbling blocks of
intermediate or advanced teams?  What are some other techniques that more
experienced coaches use?  The basic stuff is great, but more original material
would have been even better.

The book uses an interesting device.  Most of the book is written in the joined
voices of both authors.  But every once in a while, one author relates a
personal anecdote or opinion.  So the text breaks off and the lone author is
either offset from the margin or put in a sidebar.  So it's always clear who's
talking.

The last chapter about self-learning opportunities for coaches was excellent.

Here are some selected useful bits of advice that stuck with me.

During stand up meeting, make sure each team member is reporting to the team and
not to one individual in particular.  This is not a status reporting meeting but
an opportunity for the team members to coordinate their day's work.  At Insidr,
we have the scrum master take notes during the meeting and it can very easily
devolve into each member reporting status to the scrum master, each in turn,
while nobody else pays attention.  This is the opposite of what the stand up
meeting is meant to be.

Have the stand up meeting at the task board, or bring the task board to the
stand up meeting.  The meeting is more meaningful if the tasks being discussed
are right in front of everybody.

Approach reading a book like building a jigsaw puzzle: peruse all the pieces,
find the edges, work out the easy parts of the interior, and keep the most
difficult pieces for last.  When dealing with a book, scan all the headings and
illustrations to get the overall message, then read the parts that provide the
overall structure, skipping hard passages to focus on breadth over depth, then
coming back to parts of interest.
