name: Harry_Potter_and_the_Deathly_Hallows
isbn: 0545010225
title: [[http://amzn.com/0545010225][Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows]]
author: J. K. Rowling
publisher: Scholastic
year: 2007
start: 2007-07-21
stop: 2007-07-26

Great Harry Potter, but exposes many of the limitations in the
Harry Potter series.  Rowling's target reader in an eleven year
old.  This limits her writing both in the complexity of the plots
and in the subject matters she can address.

The storyline is very linear.  We follow Harry as he goes about
his quest.  We see everthing through his eyes.  There were many
opportunities to explore other points of view, like Ron's or
Hermione's, to get inside their head, see their own struggles, but
we only get to see what is externalized, in as much as it affects
Harry.  Compare Harry's first kiss with Ginny in
[[#Harry%5FPotter%5Fand%5Fthe%5FHalf%5FBlood%5FPrince][Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince]]
against Ron and Hermione's first kiss in this book.  The latter
lacks any emotion or real warmth; it is almost comical in its
development and its timing.  I was disappointed by its banality.
I wanted more than this after following these characters across
seven books and waiting for this moment for the past four.

There are also many opportunities to explore side plots, which
Rowling totally ignores.  We only get echoes of what's hapenning at
Hogwarts, or what the other members of the Order of the Phoenix are
doing while Harry is pursuing his quest.

To keep the plot simple and within the grasp of an eleven year
old, Rowling relies heavily on widely used formulas: bringing back
every possible character ever mentioned for the big finale, Mrs.
Weasley as the super-protective supermom, the whole "King's Cross"
chapter.  In parts, it is so formulaic that it appears downright
cheezy.  The same goes for the entire epilogue, where apparently
Ginny doesn't get a say in naming her own children.  In the entire
series, each character has their own name, no one is burdened with
having to live up to the name of some ancestor, except for Tom
Riddle.  This last bit, in the epilogue, is a strange and troubling
departure, one I don't find particularly tasteful.

To illustrate how the Harry Potter universe is ever unchanging
and how nothing beyond the main protagonists has any opportunity to
evolve, witness how House Slytherin removes itself from the final
battle with Voldemort.  This would have been a great occasion for
the four houses to put aside their differences and come together to
the defense of their school.  It could have begun a healing process
for the Wizarding society that is divided by the issues put forth
by Voldemort.  It could have shown to judge people on an individual
basis, not solely by their association.  It could even have ushered
an new era where students are no longer sorted into Houses anymore,
like we hear Dumbledore wish for in one flashback.  But Rowling
does not want to take it that far; Slytherins are evil and selfish
and they will not fight for their school.  In the glimpse of the
future that we see in the epilogue, things are still the same at
Hogwarts, with Houses and sorting and so forth.

The events in the Harry Potter series present a major challenge
for the Wizarding society.  As they make their way through those
traumatizing times, they have an opportunity to learn something
about themselves and emerge on the other side transformed and
enlightened, changed for the better.  Here is an opportunity for
change on a societal scale that Rowling completely passes by.  She
had a chance to reinvent her universe based on a new foundation and
she compeltely ignores it.  Instead of a story about how an entire
society can grow through the actions of a courageous few, we get a
story about a single individual's struggles.  I guess this is one
of the risks you take when you willingly dumb down a story "for the
greater good."

Thus brings me to the themes Rowling choses to discuss in her
novels.  On the one side, she wants to portray realistic teenagers,
with all that entails: search for self-identity, peer pressure, and
of course puberty.  On the other side, she's writing for
pre-pubescent readers, which pretty much precludes any sexuality
angle.  I think this is slightly disingenuous.  All relationships
are utterly platonic and dating is reduced to holding hands and
taking long walks by the lake, stealing an occasional kiss when
nobody is watching.  Harry is afraid to display any signs of
affection towards Ginny in front of her mother.  Ron and Hermione
refrain from any intimacy when Harry is present.  There is a major
dissonance between what you would expect of normal teenagers like
the ones in the story and the behaviors Rowling has them
display.

I was re-reading the scene in
[[http://amzn.com/043935806X][Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix]]
where Harry kisses Cho Chan.  Afterwards, Hermione comments on
Cho's state of mind and her conflicting feelings towards Cedric
and Harry.  She goes so far as to hint Cho could suffer socially
for going out with Harry after she had dated Cedric.  She dated him
for a few months and it's been over six months since he died at
this point.  Is she expected to go into mourning forever for a guy
she briefly dated?  She is only 15 or 16 years old!

In this book, Harry, Ron, and Hermione live together in a tent
for over six months, cut off from the rest of the world and with
nothing better to do than stare at each other.  Ron and Hermione
are obviously attracted to each other and yet nothing happens.
This is utterly unbelievable.  It goes way beyond any notion of
suspension of disbelief.  It borders on stupidity.  If you put any
three normal 17 year olds in a tent for six months, someone gonna
end up pregnant.  Even keeping the whole thing chaste, there in no
point in Ron and Hermione denying their love for that long.

One character that has evolved as the series progressed is
Neville Longbottom.  He starts out as an inept nerd that everyone
picks upon.  By the middle of the series, he starts being of
genuine help.  He really comes into his own in this book, though.
He shows courage and skill and even a modicrum of leadership.  I
wish we could have said the same of the other characters.  Draco
Malfoy is one very disappointing failure on that front.  At the end
of
[[#Harry%5FPotter%5Fand%5Fthe%5FHalf%5FBlood%5FPrince][Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince]],
there is a brief moment of possible redemption for Malfoy.  But it
is fleeting and amounts to nothing in the end.

What I really liked of the first three Harry Potter novels was
how Rowling kept expanding her fantastic universe.  But by
[[http://amzn.com/0439139597][Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire]],
she had started to close down on expansion and starting tying
everything together.  In this book, she finishes this process and
ties the last few knots that close the entire construction.  It
goes as revealing Harry's ancestry up to some ancient and forgotten
wizard family and even giving him an ancestor in common with
Voldemort.  I don't like these devices; they tend to make
everything rather incestuous.  I like it much better when the
author leaves things open to interpretation and lets the reader's
imagination roam.  It is not necessary to fully specify every
single detail and relate everything to the action that is going on
at the time.  The universe does not have to be hermetic.  When you
first read
[[http://amzn.com/0590353403][Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone]],
there is a rich tapestry of things that are thrown in off the cuff
and that the reader is free to flesh out as they like.  By the time
you get to
[[http://amzn.com/0545010225][Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows]],
the world is fully defined by the author and the reader's role
becomes much more passive.

<blockquote>

It may seem ironic that I rail against Rowling for
defining everything in her novels when that's what I admire in
Tolkien.  And maybe it's not exactly fair to compare Rowling to
Tolkien.  But in Tolkien, while everything has a backstory, not
everything is intimately related to the main story.  Rowling goes
the other way and tries to relate every element in the universe to
Harry's struggles.

</blockquote>

I quick point of curiosity: Rowling never even mentions the
Americas or Asia or Africa.  All the action takes place in
Western Europe, with just a very brief mention of Egypt.  It is as
if they didn't even exist.  Voldemort can conquer the entire world
simply by subjugating Great Britain.

But all this is nitpicking.  I thoroughly enjoyed reading this
lastest book and I had a hard time putting it down.  All the things
I pointed out were just minor irritations while I was reading.
Harry's story comes to a satisfactory conclusion, even if the
relationship between Harry and Voldemort is so tangled and
convoluted that it borders on the ridiculous.  Many of the more
subtle associations have to be explained by other characters and
it would have been nice if the reader had been given enough clues
to figure it out on their own.  Even the parts that are formulaic
are exciting and engaging, which is why those formulas are so
popular to begin with.  Once you accept that the book was written
for eleven year olds, it is very captivating and fulfilling.
