name: A_Twisted_Garden
isbn: 098221040X
title: [[http://amzn.com/098221040X][A Twisted Garden]]
author: Simon Quellen Field
publisher: Kinetic MicroScience
year: 2008
start: 2010-03-08
stop: 2010-03-27

This book was written by a former colleague of mine.  For once, I know the
author.

I'm kinda annoyed that there are no chapters.  Once in a while, the narrative
stops in the middle of a page and the action resumes at some later point at the
top of the next page.

The novel reminds me of Arthur C. Clarke, showcasing technological advances for
the near future and social trends more than the characters.  But is is more
cyberpunk in nature, set in a completely dystopian future.  And sometimes, the
author gets stuck on UI details, such as "I touched the close control on the
screen and it went black" instead of the simple "I turned it off."  He
acknowledges influence from Neal Stephenson.

Technology is definitely the main character here.  The protagonists and the
intrigue are only there to provide a framework to showcase various futuristic
concepts and devices.  When the author's imagination runs dry of new ideas, the
main plot is quickly brought to a conclusion and the novel ends.  Rather
abruptly.

The beginning, where the author lays out a vast array of new concepts and ideas,
was quite catchy and drew on my curiosity.  The middle part started to develop
the main intrigue and attempt to provide the characters with a semblance of
depth.  I was expecting some twists and turns, but everything was progressing
quite linearly.  The end unforeseeable only in its brevity.  All plot lines are
brought to an end and the story concludes in a way that felt rushed.

I think back to Umberto Eco's
"[[http://amzn.com/025320318X][The Role of the Reader]]"
where Eco explains that the reader picks the parts of the novel that interests
him or her and that the master novelist will weave multiple paths together in
one work and let the reader pick the one that interests them the most.  Here,
there are three obvious paths: technology in the various contraptions, sociology
in the interactions between the character, and intrigue in the main plot.  The
first one was a good hook but lacked cohesiveness.  The second led nowhere.  I
got more and more interested in the third one when the first two petered out,
but it received the least treatment of the three and ended too quickly, without
any noticeable twists or turns.

Still an enjoyable read, but was disappointing in the end.
