name: The_Great_Gatsby
isbn: 0743273567
isbn13: 9780743273565
title: [[https://www.amazon.com/dp/0743273567][The Great Gatsby]]
author: F. Scott Fitzgerald
publisher: Scribner
year: 1925
acquired: 2019-08-06
start: 2019-08-09
stop: 2019-08-30

I read this back in High School.  I had recently seen the Baz Luhrmann movie
adaptation and I thought it was time for me to read it again.

I'd come to realize I remembered very little from the novel.  Maybe it's because
it was a school assignment.  Maybe it's because I was a teenager, back then.
Maybe it's because my English was not good enough back then for the level of
language in the book.  I vaguely remembered there was an important scene at the
Plaza Hotel, but I don't know if I remembered its importance from reading it or
from quizzes later in class.  And I vaguely remembered the Valley of Ashes.  And
that there was a lot of mystery around the character of Gatsby.

The movie was a very good refresher, but Baz Luhrmann's vision tends to go far
beyond the source material.  I was eager to re-discover the original story and
Fitzgerald's unmodified vision.  The introduction talks about how youth and
adults can have different interpretations of the story.  I was curious as to how
I would perceive it this time around.

The movie, it turns out, stays pretty close to the book.  It does dial up the
extravagance: Gatsby drives recklessly, the parties are over the top.  I liken
it to over-saturating the colors in a picture; it's the same picture, but
everything in it is dialed up to 11.  One startling difference, though, is that
in the book, Gatsby never loses his temper at Daisy the way he does at the
Plaza Hotel in the movie.  And the framing device of Nick in an asylum was also
in poor taste.

The book is a nice study in contrasts.  Everywhere you look, the author is
comparing things: rich vs. working class, Old Money vs. New Money, responsible
vs. careless, yearnings vs. reality.

Here is an example from when Gatsby's father visits Gatsby's impressive house:

<blockquote>

He had shown [the photograph] so often that I think it was more real to him now
than the house itself.

<footer>page 172</footer>
</blockquote>

Gatsby's father had never seen the house before and latched on to the photograph
as proof of its existence.  In his mind, the photograph came to replace the
actual object.

It is tempting to apply the same process in Gatsby with regard to Daisy and the
green light at the end of her dock.  But here, it is slightly different.  Gatsby
is yearning for the green light because it stands closer to Daisy than he is.
Once he's got Daisy by his side, he can forget about the green light and its
supposed proximity to Daisy.

Nick Carraway, the narrator, is always somewhere in the center of Fitzgerald's
dichotomies.  His family is somewhat well off, but he still has to work.  He
likes to think he is honest and responsible, but he willingly goes along with
his friends' extravagances.  He shows some desire for Jordan, but it does not
turn into an obsession.  He makes for a nice neutral narrator.

Everyone else is pretty despicable:

<blockquote>

They were careless people, Tom and Daisy&mdash;they smashed up things and
creatures and then retreated back into their money or their vast carelessness,
or whatever it was that kept them together, and let other people clean up the
mess they had made...

<footer>page 179</footer>
</blockquote>

In the end, Gastby was a character trapped in a past that he had constructed out
of thin air.  Tom and Daisy are trapped in the trappings of Old Money.  Jordan
is trapped in her own constant dishonesty.  Nick is somewhat relieved to get
away from it all.
