name: The_Hunger_Games
isbn13: 9780439023481
isbn: 0439023483
title: [[http://amzn.com/0439023483][The Hunger Games]]
author: Suzanne Collins
publisher: Scholastic
year: 2008
start: 2012-04-17
stop: 2012-04-23

The movie was pleasant enough and a friend recommended it, saying it was in line
with other books I've read.  The movie missed the boat, though, on its depiction
of running a reality show.  The book was written in 2008 and the movie was made
in 2011, when we have clear patterns of how these shows engage and entertain the
audience to drive advertisers, from Survivor to American Idol.  There are
stages, constants recaps, and many engage the entire viewing audience using
various voting schemes.  All that was missing and instead we got a very
simplistic show driven by a small elite of Sponsors, with most of the viewing
audience left out.  I understand that the powers-that-be don't care about the
people in the districts, but they should at least get to everyone in the
Capitol.

I was happy to find that the novel does a much better job of portraying the
entertainment aspect of the Hunger Games that the movie did.  While the book is
told entirely from Katniss' point of view, we get glimpses of when she used to
watch the Games and how she imagines things are playing out as she participates
in them.  Here, the entire audience of Panem gets to participate, though it is
clear that residents of the various districts are limited by their economic
situation.

I found the beginning annoying.  Katniss, the main character, goes to great
length to over dramatize what should be mundane experiences, such as eating a
blackberry on a lazy morning.  If there had been more context to make the moment
special and to justify being over-sensitive, it might have worked.  But that
moment is a quiet moment but otherwise ordinary moment and did not deserve that
level of intimate details.

As the situation gets worse for the main characters, things start to improve
from a literary perspective.  Just a little further, a passage really stands out
for me, on page 40, as Katniss is coming to grips with having to fight others to
the death (emphasis is mine):

<blockquote>

"Katniss, it's just hunting.  You're the best hunter I know," says Gale.

"It's not just hunting.  They're armed.  They think," I say.

"So do you.  And you've had more practice.  Real practice," he says.  "You know how to kill."

"Not people," I say.

"How different can it be, really?" says Gale grimly.

The awful thing is that _if I can forget they're people, it will be no different at all_.

</blockquote>

This passage talks to how people can do truly horrible things to other people if
they just dehumanize them first.  As soon as we don't perceive the other as a
fellow human being, we can excuse anything we do to them.  This passage is clear
and concise, without any superfluous sappy over-sensitivity.

And there is another passage on page 65:

<blockquote>

What must it be like, I wonder, to live in a world where food appear at the
press of a button?  How would I spend the hours I now commit to combing the
woods for sustenance if it were so easy to come by?.

</blockquote>

The trick here is that while Katniss can hardly imagine a world of plenty, the
author and her contemporary middle class audience do live in such a world.  It
is difficult to be any clearer: the reader is not a sympathetic resident of
District 12, but a citizen of the Capitol.

Unfortunately, these small glimpses don't get developed much further.  Katniss
is much too busy trying to stay alive to ponder these questions at great length.

The action parts are well done.  I am not a hunter, so I cannot speak to the
veracity of her experiences in the arena.  But I wonder if the author has done
any hunting herself, or else how she researched those aspects of the book.

By the time the crisis is resolved, Katniss has become overly sappy again.  Her
character has grown a bit, but there was a lot more potential there.  Maybe the
sequels will give her time to internalize her experiences.
