name: Design_for_the_Mind
isbn: 1617292958
isbn13: 9781617292958
title: [[https://amzn.com/1617292958][Design for the Mind: Seven Psychological Principles of Persuasive Design]]
author: Victor S. Yocco
publisher: Manning
year: 2016
acquired: 2016-06-16
start: 2016-09-01
stop: 2016-12-16

This book shows how to apply principles from psychology and cognitive science
when building user interfaces that are used by humans.  Unfortunately, the
author only has had limited exposure to psychology, so his knowledge lacks
depth.  He can point to research and quote various researchers, but it feels
more by rote than internalized and comprehensive understanding.  This is
immediately apparent in the preface and shows up periodically along the book.

I appreciated the quick tour of psychological concepts.  It gives many pointers
for things to read further.

    * planned behaviors
    * decisions with an uncertain outcome
    * Fogg's model
    * how to influence the decisions of others
    * social influence
    * framing communications
    * persuasion, with a focus on ELM

These models clearly appeals to the author, but he could do a better job of
convincing his readers that they are worthwhile models.  It is not clear to the
lay person whether these models are gaining traction in the psychology/behavior
community.  The way the author uses them to solve design issues reads more like
a list of "life hacks".

Each concept is treated on its own, with few connections to each other.  The
formula for each chapter quickly becomes tedious.  The author should have
connected or contrasted the material on persuasion with the other psychological
principles in the book.  The case study near the end was a missed opportunity to
tie the elements of the book together.  They are hastily put together and
rapidly glossed over, with too much focus on what was used and not enough on
what was left out or why it didn't apply in that context.

The author also places a lot of value (to much, in my opinion) on having
researchers drive the user testing.  Yes, professionals will get you the very
best results, but there is a lot you can do on your own and still get a much
value.

In summary, the book is an interesting list of pointers for further research.
